<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Electra</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="electra" epub:type="z3998:drama z3998:scene">
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</b> with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> and Pylades.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O Child of Agamemnon, who sometime</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was Captain of the host that leaguered Troy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis thine at last to view before thee spread</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The scene thy heart was set on. Yonder lies</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Old Argos thou so long hast yearned to see,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Once refuge of the gadfly-driven maid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
								<br/>
								<span>Daughter of Inachus; and, Orestes, here</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The market-place from the Wolf-slayer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a> named;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There on our left is Hera’s far-famed shrine;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lo! before us, at our very feet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou seest Mycenae of the golden hoard,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And there the palace grim of Pelops’ line,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Deep stained with murder. Thence I bore thee once</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Snatched from beside thy father’s bleeding corse</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By kindly hands, thy sister’s; rescued thus</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I fostered thee till thou hadst reached the age</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To be the avenger of thy father’s blood.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But now, Orestes, and thou, Pylades,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dearest of friends, the hour for you is ripe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To take resolve and that right speedily.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For lo, already the bright beams of day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Waken to melody the pipe of birds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And black night with her glimmering stars has waned.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So ere a soul be stirring in the streets</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Confer together and resolve yourselves.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No time for longer pause; now must we act.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Dearest of followers, how well thou show’st</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The constant service of thy loyalty!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For as the high-bred steed, though he be old,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pricks up his ears and champs the bit for joy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When battle rages, even so dost thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Both urge us on and follow with the first.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore I will unfold our plans, and thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Note well my words, and if in aught I seem</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To miss the mark, admonish and correct.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Know then that when I left thee to consult</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Pythian oracle and learn how best</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To execute just vengeance for my sire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On those that slew him, Phoebus answered thus:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>
									<em>Trust not to shields or armed hosts, but steal</em>
								</span>
								<br/>
								<span>
									<em>The chance thyself the avenging blow to deal.</em>
								</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Since then the Pythian god hath thus advised,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go thou and watch thine opportunity</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To enter in the palace and observe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What happens there and bring us full report.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And fear not to be recognised; long years</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thy white locks, the blossom of old age,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have changed thee wholly. Forge some specious tale:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou art a Phocian stranger hither sent</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By Phanoteus their doughtiest ally.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Report, confirming with an oath the tale,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How that Orestes by a fatal chance</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath perished, from his speeding chariot hurled</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(So let thy tale run) at the Pythian games.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And we meanwhile, as the god ordered us,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>First having crowned my father’s sepulchre</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With pure libations and rich offerings</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of new-shorn tresses, will return anon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An urn of well-wrought brasswork in our hands,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The same we hid in the brush-wood, as thon know’st.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This will confirm the feignèd tale we bring,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That I am dead and to the pyre consigned,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Naught left of me but ashes and grey dust:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Little reck I by rumour to be dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So I live on to win me deathless fame.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The end, methinks, gives any fraud excuse.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oft have I heard of men, reputed wise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who spread the rumour of their death, and so</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Returning home a heartier welcome found.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus by my bruited death I too aspire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To blaze a sudden meteor on my foes.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But O my country and my country’s gods,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Give me fair welcome, prosper my emprise!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And greet me too, thou palace of my sires;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A heaven-sent purger of thy stain I come.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Send me not forth again to banishment,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But O! restore to me its ancient wealth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May I refound its old prosperity!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Enough of words; go presently, old friend,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Attend thy business; and we two will go,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And watch the time, for opportunity</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is the best captain of all enterprise.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Within.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah me! unhappy me!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hist! from the doors a voice, my son, methought,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A wailing as of some handmaid within.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Can it be sad Electra! Shall we stay</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And overhear her lamentable plaint?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not so; we first must strive before all else</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To do as Loxias bade us and thence take</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our auspices⁠—with lustral waters lave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy father’s grave, thus shall we surely win</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Vantage at each step, victory in the end. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</b> from the palace.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i7">O holy light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i7">O circumambient air,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i7">What wailings of despair,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i7">What sight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have ye not witnessed in the first grey morn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beatings of breasts and bosoms madly torn!</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">By night for me is spread</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">No festal banquet in this haunted hall,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">But my lone pallet bed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">All night I muse upon my father dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Not in a foreign land at Ares’ call,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">But here, at home, by my own mother slain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Her and Aegisthus, these adulterers twain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Felled by their axe’s bloody stroke,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">E’en as the woodman fells an oak.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">And I, O father, I alone of all</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Thy house am left forlorn</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">To make my moan, to mourn</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i6">Thy piteous fall.</span>
							</p>
							<p>
								<span class="i2">Yet never, while these eyes</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Behold or sun or star-bespangled skies,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Will I restrain my plaint, my bitter cries;</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">But like some nightingale</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">My ravished nest bewail,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">And through these halls shall sound my groans and sighs.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Halls of Persephonè and Death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Guide of the shades, O Hermes, and O Wraith,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Ye god-sprung Furies dread</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Who watch when blood is shed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Or stained the marriage bed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">O aid me to avenge my father slain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">O send my brother back again!</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Alone, no more I countervail</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Grief that o’erloads the scale.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Strophe 1</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Child of a mother all unblest,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Electra, how in grief that knows no rest</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou witherest;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mourning thy father’s cruel fate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By her betrayed and slaughtered by her mate.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Black death await</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The plotter of that sin,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If prayer so bold may answer win!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Ah, noble friends ye come, I see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To ease my misery;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your kind intent, O trust me, I perceive.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet can I never leave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My task, each day, each hour, anew to shed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tears o’er my father dead.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O kindly hearts, so ready to repay</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All friendship owes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Leave me, O leave me (this one boon I pray)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To my wild woes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Yet him, thy sire, from Acheron’s dark shore</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By prayers or cries thou never can’st restore,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">No, never more;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And by excess of grief thou perishest.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If remedy be none, were it not best</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">From grief to rest?</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">O rest thee! why</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus nurse thy fruitless misery?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>That child’s insensate who remembers not</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">His sire’s sad lot.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O bird of Zeus, to thine I’ll set my note,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Who with full throat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For Itys, Itys griev’st from eve till morn.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Ah! Niobe forlorn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How blest art thou who tombed in stone dost lie</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">And weep for aye!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Strophe 2</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Not thou alone, hast sorrow; others share</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Thy load of care.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Think on thy kinsfolk whom afflictions press</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Than thine no less,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Iphianassa and Chrysothemis.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Think of thy brother; sorrow now is his,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An exiled youth, yet shortly shall he come</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By heaven’s good guidance home,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And glad Mycenae shall Orestes own</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Heir to his father’s throne.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i4">Yea, for him long years I wait,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Unwed, childless, desolate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Drenched with tears that ever flow</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">For my barren load of woe;</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">And the wrongs whereof he wot,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Or hath heard, are all forgot.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">All those messages are vain⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">How he hopes to come again,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">How for home his heart doth yearn!⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Yet he wills not to return.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Take heart, my child, Zeus still in heaven is king,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">And orders everything;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To him commit the wrath that gnaws thy breast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">His will is ever best.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nurse, as is meet, thy vengeance, but abate</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Excess of hate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For Time can heal, a gentle god and mild.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Nor Agamemnon’s child</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who long by Crisa’s pastoral shore remains,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Nor he who reigns</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er Acheron will nevermore relent.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span class="i2">Nay but for me is spent</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The best of life; I languish in despair.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Fordone with care,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Without a parent’s love or husband’s aid,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">An orphaned maid.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here in the chambers of my sire I wait</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">In low estate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or like a stranger who in beggar’s weeds</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">On fragments feeds.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Strophe 3</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Dire was the voice that greeted first</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Thy sire’s return, and dire the cry</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That from the banquet-chamber burst,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">A wail of agony;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What time the brazen axe’s blow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Struck him and laid him low,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twas lust begat and craft conceived the deed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A monstrous offspring of a monstrous seed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whether a god or mortal wrought the woe.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Dawn, the darkest of all morrows,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Night, the crown of all my sorrows,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When that foul feast for the dead</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By those traitors twain was spread,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who slew my sire⁠—me too</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In slaying him they slew.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May the great Olympian King</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Send on them like suffering;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bitter be of sin the fruit;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May they perish branch and root!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Antistrophe 3</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>O curb thy tongue! hast thou no thought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How thine own misery thou hast wrought,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And mak’st a burden of thy life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By ever heaping strife on strife</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In sullen mood? Ill fares the right</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When feebleness contends with might.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Bitter constraint compelled me, and I know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My heart with wrath did overflow;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But never while life lasts will I control,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus wronged, the indignant passion of my soul.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye mean me well, but solace is there none</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For woes like mine, so all who know must own.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forbear, kind comforters, forbear; be sure</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A case so desperate admits no cure.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What respite to my sorrows, what relief?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No tears, no moans, can satisfy such grief.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>O heap not misery on misery,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As a fond mother I would plead with thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>No, for this villainy grows and knows no bound.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where can a race be found</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So vile as they, to disregard the dead?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By praise of such men I were ill bestead.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O may I ne’er, if fate should on me smile,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In careless ease sad memories beguile,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Clipping the pinions of my mournful song,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The dirges due that to my sire belong.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For if to dust and nothingness the dead</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are doomed, nor blood for blood be shed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Farewell to sanctities of law,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Farewell to reverence and awe.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I came in thy behalf no less than mine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Daughter, but if my words displease thee, well,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have it thy way; we follow thee no less.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It shames me, friends, that ye should thus set down</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To frowardness my too persistent grief.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But since I yield to hard necessity,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bear with me. How indeed could any woman</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of noble blood who sees her father’s home</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Plague-stricken, as I see it night and day,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And each day stricken worse, not do as I?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For me a mother’s love has turned to hate;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In my own home on sufferance I live</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With my sire’s murderers, on whose will it rests</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To give or to withhold my daily bread.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Think what a life is mine, to see each day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Aegisthus seated on my father’s throne,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wearing the royal robes my father wore,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Pouring libations on the hearth, whereat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He slew him, and, to crown his insolence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The assassin lays him in my father’s bed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beside my mother⁠—mother shall I call</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His paramour? So lost to shame is she</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That the adulteress fears no vengeance. No,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As if exulting in her infamy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She watches month to month to know the day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereon by treachery she slew my sire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And keeps that day with dance and sacrifice,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Each month, of sheep to tutelary gods.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beholding this I weep and waste within,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And to myself bewail the unhallowed feast</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Named of my sire, with silent tears, for e’en</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The luxury of wailing is denied me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This woman (saintly is her speech) upbraids</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And rates me thus: “Ungodly, hateful girl,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hast thou alone to bear a father’s loss,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Art thou the only mourner? Out upon thee!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Perdition seize thee! and in hell may’st thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Find no deliverance from thy present grief!”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So rails she, save at times when rumours run</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Orestes is at hand, then wild with rage</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She thunders in my ears “This is thy doing;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was it not thou who from my hands didst steal</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Orestes and convey him safe away?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mark my words, thou shalt rue it!” So she screams,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And her abettor’s there to egg her on,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her glorious consort who repeats her gibes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That rogue in grain, that dastardly poltroon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who fights his battles with a woman’s aid.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Meanwhile I wait until Orestes comes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To end my woes, and waiting pine away.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By ever dallying he has quite destroyed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The hopes I had and those I might have had.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In such a case what room is there, my friends,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For patience, what for piety? In sooth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Those in ill plight are driven to evil ways.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Stay, tell me, is Aegisthus nigh at hand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While thus thou speakest, or is he from home?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>From home, of course! Think you, were he within,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I should thus venture forth? He is now afield.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>More freely then may I converse with thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If this is so.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is; ask what thou wilt.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis of thy brother I would question thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Comes he, or tarries yet? I fain would know.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He says “I come,” but does not what he says.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A man thinks twice with some great work in hand.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I thought not twice when I delivered him.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Take heart, he is loyal and will not fail his friends,</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I trust him, else I had not lived so long.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No more for this time; at the doors I see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Chrysothemis, thy sister, of one sire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Born and one mother; in her hands she bears</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gifts for the tomb that use and wont ordain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Sister, why com’st thou once more to declaim</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In public at the outer gate? Has time</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not schooled thee to desist from idle rage?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I too, my sister, chafe no less than thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At our sad fortunes, and had I the power,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would make it plain how I regard our masters.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But in the storm ’tis best to reef the sail,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor utter threats we cannot execute.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I would thou wert likeminded; yet I know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Justice is on thy side, and I am wrong.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet if I am to keep my liberty,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I needs must bow before the powers that be.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O shame that thou, the child of such a sire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should’st him forget and take thy mother’s part;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For all these admonitions are not thine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A lesson thou repeatest, learnt of her.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Make thine election then, to be unwise,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or show thy wisdom by forgetting friends.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou saidst, “If but the power were granted me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I would make plain the hate I feel for them;”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet when I am straining every nerve</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To avenge my sire, thou wilt not aid me; nay,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dissuadest and wouldst have me hold my hand.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall we to all our ills add cowardice?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Tell me⁠—or let me tell thee⁠—what have I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To gain by ceasing from my sad complaint?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I still have life? a sorry life, indeed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But good enough for me; and them I vex,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And vexing them do honour to the dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If anything can touch the world of shades.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou hatest? Nay, thy deeds belie thy words,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While thou consortest with the murderers;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So would not I, though they should offer me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The pomp that makes thee proud, the loaded board,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy life of ease; no, I would never yield.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Enough for me spare diet and a soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Void of offence; thy state I covet not,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor wouldst thou, wert thou wise. Men might have called thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Child of the noblest sire that ever lived;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be called thy mother’s, rightly named as base,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Betrayer of thy dead sire and thy kin.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No angry words, I pray, for both of you</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There’s profit in this parleying, if thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wouldst learn of her, and she in turn of thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know her moods too well to take offence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor had I now approached her, but I learnt</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of new impending peril that is like</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To put a finish to her long-drawn woes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say what can be this terror; if ’tis worse</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than what I now bear, I will call a truce.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All I have learnt in full I will impart.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They purpose, if thou wilt not stay thy plaints,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To send thee where thou shalt not see the sun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Far hence, to some dark dungeon, there to spend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy days and nights in litanies of woe.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore reflect, and blame me not too late;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Take warning and repent while yet ’tis time.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Have they indeed resolved to treat me thus?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The instant that Aegisthus is returned.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, for my part I would he came back soon.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Insensate girl! What mean’st thou by this prayer?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Would he were here, if this be his intent.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That thou mayst suffer⁠—what? Hast lost thy wits?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A flight long leagues away from all of you.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Art thou indifferent to thy present life?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O ’tis a marvellously happy life!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It might have been, couldst thou have schooled thyself.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Teach me not basely to betray my friends.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not I; I teach submission to the strong.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Fawn, if thou wilt; such cringing suits not me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yet not to fall through folly were no blame.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If needs be, in a father’s cause I’ll fall.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I trust our father pardons us for this.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Traitors take refuge in like sentiments.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou wilt not heed then or be ruled by me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am not in my dotage, save the mark!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then I will do my errand.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Whither away?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For whom art carrying these burnt offerings?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My mother bids me crown our father’s grave.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Her mortal enemy’s! How sayest thou?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The husband whom she slew, so thou wouldst say.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Which of her friends advised her? whence this whim?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A nightly vision warned her, so I think.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Gods of my fathers, aid me in this pass!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Dost thou take heart of courage from her dread?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Before I answer let me hear the dream.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>There is but little that I have to tell.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Tell it no less. A little word, men say,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath oftentimes determined weal or woe.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis said that she beheld thy sire and mine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In bodily presence standing by her side,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Revisiting the light of day. He took</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sceptre of Aegisthus, once his own,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And at the household altar planted it,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And from it sprang and spread a fruitful bough,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till it o’ershadowed all Mycenae’s land.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such is the tale one told me who was by</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When to the Sun-god she declared her dream.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Further I know not, save that in alarm</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She sent me hither. Hearken then to me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sister, I pray thee by our household gods,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fall not through folly; if thou spurn me now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Too late in sorrow wilt thou seek my aid.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, let not aught, my sister, touch the tomb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all thou bearest. ’Twere a shame, a sin,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To offer on behalf of her, the accursed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gifts or libations to our father’s ghost.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Scatter them to the winds or bury them</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Deep in the dust, where nothing may defile</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our father’s lone couch; let her find them there,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A buried treasure when she comes to die.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were she not abjectest of womankind,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She ne’er had thought with offerings of hate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To crown her murdered victim’s sepulchre.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thinkst thou ’tis likely that her buried lord</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will take these honours kindly at her hands</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who slew him without pity like a foe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mangled<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a> his corse, and for ablution washed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bloodstains on his head? Say, is it like</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These gifts will purge her of blood-guiltiness?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It cannot be. Fling them away and cut</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A tress of thine own locks; and for my share</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Give him from me⁠—a poor thing, but my best⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This unkempt lock, this girdle unadorned.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then fall upon thy knees and pray that he</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May come, our gracious champion from the dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And that the young Orestes yet may live</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To trample underfoot his vanquished foes.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So may we some day crown our father’s tomb</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With costlier gifts than these poor offerings.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I can but think, ’tis but a thought, that he</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had part in sending her this ominous dream.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Still, sister, do this service and so aid</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thyself and me, and him the most beloved</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all men, e’en though dead, thy sire and mine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis piously advised, and thou, my daughter,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wilt do her bidding, if thou art discreet.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I will. When duty calls, ’twere lack of sense</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For two to wrangle; both should join to act.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Only when I essay this perilous task,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be silent, an you love me, friends, for if</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My mother hears of it, I shall have cause</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To rue my indiscretion soon or late. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Count me a prophet false, a witless wight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">If Justice, who inspires my prophecy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Comes not, my child, to vindicate the right.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">She comes and that right speedily.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My heart grows bold and nothing fears;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That dream was music in my ears.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It tells me that thy sire who whilom led</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">The Greeks to victory hath not forgot;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, and that axe with double brazen head</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Still thirsts for blood to wipe away its blot.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>So leaping from her ambush, brazen-shod,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Comes the Erinys with an armed host’s tread,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For she hath seen a pair who knew not God</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Driven by lust to an adulterous bed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A bed with stains of murder dyed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A bridal without groom or bride.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore I know that not in vain is sent</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">This portent that the fall of guilt foretells,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, if this vision fails of its intent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Vain is all sooth, all dreams, all oracles.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">O chariot-race of Pelops old,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">The source of sorrows manifold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">What endless curse hath fallen on us</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Since to his sea-grave Myrtilus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a></span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Sank from the golden chariot hurled;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Woe upon woe, of woes a world.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So once again I find thee here at large,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For he who kept thee close and so restrained</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy scandalous tongue, Aegisthus, is away;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet thy complaints, repeated many a time</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To many, censured my tyrannic rule⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The insults that I heaped on thee and thine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was it an insult if I paid in kind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The flouts and taunts wherewith thou girdest at me?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy father, the sole pretext of thy grief,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Died by my hand, aye mine, I know it well,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis true beyond denial; yet not I,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not I alone, but Justice slew him too:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thou shouldst side with Justice, wert thou wise.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This sire of thine for whom thy tears still flow</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alone of all the Greeks could steel his heart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To yield thy sister as a sacrifice;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A father who begat her and ne’er felt</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A mother’s pangs of travail. Tell me now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wherefore he offered her, on whose behalf?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Greeks, thou sayest. And what right had they</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To kill my child? For Menelaus’ sake,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His brother? Should such pretext stay my hand?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had not his brother children twain to serve</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As victims? Should not they, as born of sire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And mother for whose sake the host embarked,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have been preferred before my innocent child?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Had Death forsooth some craving for my child</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Rather than hers? or had the wretch, her sire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A tender heart for Menelaus’ brood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And for my flesh and blood no tenderness?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That choice was for a father rash and base;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So, though I differ from thee, I opine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And could the dead maid speak, she would agree.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I therefore view the past without remorse,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And if to thee I seem perverted, clear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy judgment ere thou makst thyself a judge.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This time thou canst not say that I began</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The quarrel or provoked thee. But if thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wilt give me leave, I fain would speak the truth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Regarding both my sister and my sire.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My leave is given, and, hadst thou always shown</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This temper, I had listened without pain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hear then. Thou say’st, “I slew thy father.” Who</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could well avow a blacker crime than that?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Justly or not, what matters? But I’ll prove</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There was no justice in it; ’twas the lure</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of a vile wretch that hurried thee along⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy lover’s. Ask the Huntress Artemis</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For what offence she prisoned every gust</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That blows at Aulis; rather, as from her</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou mayst not win an answer, I will tell thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My father once⁠—so have I heard the tale⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Taking his pleasure in her sacred glade</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Started an antlered stag with dappled hide,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shot it, and shooting made some careless vaunt.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Latona’s daughter, wroth thereat, detained</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Achaeans, that in quittance for her hart</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My sire might give his daughter, life for life.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And so it came to pass that she was slain:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The fleet becalmed no other way could win</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Homeward or Troyward. For that cause alone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Reluctantly, by hard constraint, at last</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He slew her, no wise for his brother’s sake.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But if, as thou interpretest the deed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twas done to please his brother, even thus</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should he for that have died by hand of thine?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What law is this? In laying down such law</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See that against thyself thou lay not up</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dire retribution; for if blood for blood</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be justice, thou wouldst justly die the first.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Look, if thy pleading be not all a lie.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Say, if thou wilt, why thou art living now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A life of shame as partner of his bed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wretch who aided thee to slay my sire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bearing him children, casting out for them</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The rightful heirs in rightful wedlock born.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can I approve such acts? Or wilt thou say</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This too was vengeance for a daughter’s blood?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A shameful plea, if urged, for shame it is</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To wed a foeman for a daughter’s sake.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But in convincing thee I waste my breath;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou hast no answer but to scream that I</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Revile a mother; and in sooth to us</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou art mistress more than mother, for I pine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A wretched drudge, by thee and by thy mate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Downtrodden; and that other child who scarce</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Escaped thy hands, Orestes, wears away</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In weary exile his unhappy days.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Oft hast thou taxed me that I reared him up</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For vengeance; so I willed it, had I power.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go to, proclaim me out of my own mouth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A shrew, a scold, a vixen⁠—what thou wilt.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For if I be accomplished in such arts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Methinks I show my breed, a trick o’ the blood.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I see she breathes forth fury and no more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Heeds if her words with justice harmonize.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why then should <em>I</em> heed one who thus insults</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A mother, at her ripe age too? Dost think</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That she would stick at any deed of shame?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, I am shamefast, though to thee I seem</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shameless; I know such manners in a maid</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are ill-becoming, in a daughter strange;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But thy malignity, thy cruel acts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Compel me; baseness is from baseness learnt.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou brazen monster! I, my words, my acts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are matter for thy glib garrulity!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The fault is thine, not mine; for thine the acts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And mine are but the words that show them forth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Now, by our lady Artemis, thou shalt rue</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy boldness when Aegisthus comes again.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>See, rage distracts thee; first thou grantest me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Free speech, and wilt not listen when I speak.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I let thee have thy say, and wilt not thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hush thy wild tongue and let me sacrifice?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Go, I adjure thee, sacrifice; nor blame</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My voice; henceforth I shall not speak one word.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Bear this, my maid, this offering of earth’s fruits,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That to our King I may uplift my prayers,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To rid me of the dread that haunts my soul.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O Phoebus, our Defender, lend an ear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To my petition; dark and veiled the words</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For those who love me not, nor were it meet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To lay my whole heart bare, while she is by,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ready to blab with her envenomed tongue</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through all the town some empty, rash report.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Darkly I pray; to my dark prayer attend!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The vision that I yesternight beheld</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of double import, if, Lycean King,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It bodes me well, fulfil it; but if ill,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>May it upon my enemies recoil!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If there be some who treacherously plot</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To dispossess me of my wealth and power,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Prevent them, and vouchsafe that I may rule</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The house of Atreus in security,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And wield the sceptre, sharing prosperous days</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With the same friends and with my children⁠—those</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By malice and blind rancour not estranged.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Grant, O Lycean Phoebus, of thy grace,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To me and mine fulfilment of my prayers.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And for those other things my heart desires,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Though unexpressed, thou as a god dost know them;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For naught is hidden from the sons of Zeus.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Good ladies, might a stranger crave to learn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If this indeed be King Aegisthus’ house?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It is, Sir; thou thyself hast guessed aright.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And am I right conjecturing that I see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His royal consort here? She looks a queen.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Indeed thou art in presence of the queen.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I greet thee, Madam, and I bear to thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fair news, and to Aegisthus, from a friend.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I welcome thy fair words, but first would know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who sends thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Phanoteus, the Phocian,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On a grave mission.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Tell me, stranger, what.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>It must be friendly coming from a friend.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Orestes’ death, to sum in brief my tale.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Me miserable! Now am I undone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What say’st thou, man, what say’st thou? Heed not her.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I say again, Orestes is no more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah me, I’m lost, ah wretched me, undone!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Attend to thine own business. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</b>.</i> Tell me, Sir,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The circumstance and manner of his death.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That was my errand, and I’ll tell thee all.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To the great festival of Greece he went,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Delphic Games, and when the herald’s voice</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Announced the opening trial, the foot race,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He stepped into the lists, a radiant form,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The admired of all beholders. Like a shaft</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He sped from starting point to goal and back,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And bore the crown of glorious victory.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To speak in brief where there is much to tell,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I never heard of prowess like to his.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This much I’ll add, the judges of the games</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Announced no single contest wherein he</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was not the victor, and each time glad shouts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hailed the award⁠—“An Argive wins, Orestes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The son of Agamemnon, King of men,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who led the hosts of Hellas.” So he sped.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But when some angry godhead intervenes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mightiest man is foiled. Another day,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When at sunsetting chariots vied in speed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He entered; many were the charioteers.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From Sparta one, and one Achaean, two</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From Libya, skilled to guide the yokèd team;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The fifth in rank, with mares of Thessaly,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Orestes came, and an Aeolian sixth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With chestnut fillies, a Megarian seventh,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The eighth, with milk-white steeds, an Aenian,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ninth from Athens, city built by gods;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Last a Boeotian made the field of ten.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then, as the appointed umpires signed to each</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By lot his place, they ranged their chariots,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And at the trumpet’s brazen signal all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Started, all shook the reins and urged their steeds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With shouts; the whole plain echoed with a din</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of rattling cars and⁠—the dust rose to heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They drave together, all in narrow space,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And plied their goads, each keen to leave behind</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The press of whirling wheels and snorting steeds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For each man saw his car beflecked with foam</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or felt the coursers’ hot breath at his back.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Orestes, as he rounded either goal,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Steered close and shaved the pillar with his nave,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Urging his offside trace-horse, while he checked</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The nearer. For a while they all sped on</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unscathed, but soon the Aenian’s hard-mouthed steeds</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bolted, and ’twixt the sixth and seventh round</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Gainst the Barcaean chariot headlong dashed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then on that first mishap there followed close</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shock upon shock, crash upon crash, that strewed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With wrack of cars all the Crisaean plain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This the shrewd charioteer of Athens marked,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Slackened and drew aside, letting go by</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The surge of chariots running in mid course.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Last came Orestes who had curbed his team</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(He trusted to the finish), but at sight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of the Athenian, his one rival left,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With a shrill holloa in his horses’ ears</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He followed; and the two abreast raced on,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now one, and now the other a head in front.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus far Orestes, ill-starred youth, had steered</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Steadfast at every lap his steadfast team,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But at the last, in turning, all too soon</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He loosed the left-hand rein, and ere he knew it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The axle struck against the pillar’s edge.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The axle box was shattered, and himself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hurled o’er the chariot rail, and in his fall</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Caught in the reins’ grip he was dragged along,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While his scared team dashed wildly o’er the course,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But as the crowd beheld his overthrow,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There rose a wail of pity for the youth⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His doughty deeds and his disastrous end⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now flung to earth, now bounding to the sky</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Feet uppermost. At length the charioteers</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stayed in their wild career his steeds and freed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The corpse all blood-bestained, disfigured, marred</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Past recognition of his nearest friend.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Straightway the Phoceans burnt him on a pyre,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And envoys now are on their way to bring</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That mighty frame shut in a little urn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lay his ashes in his fatherland.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such is my tale, right piteous to tell;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But for all those who saw it with their eyes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As I, there never was a sadder sight.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Alas, alas! our ancient masters’ line,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So it appears, hath perished root and branch.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Are these glad tidings? Rather would I say</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sad, but of profit. Ah how hard my lot</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When I must look for safety to my losses.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why, lady, why downhearted at my news?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Strange is the force of motherhood; a mother,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whate’er her wrongs, can ne’er forget her child.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So it would seem our coming was in vain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, not in vain. How canst thou say “in vain,”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If of his death thou bringst convincing proof,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who from my life drew life, and yet, estranged,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Forgat the breasts that suckled him, forgat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A mother’s tender nurture, fled his home,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And since that day has never seen me more,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Slandered me as the murderer of his sire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And breathed forth vengeance?⁠—Neither night nor day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Kind slumber closed these eyes, and immanent dread</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of death each minute stretched me on the rack.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But now on this glad day, of terror rid</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From him and her, a deadlier plague than he,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That vampire who was housed with me to drain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My very life blood⁠—now, despite her threats</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Methinks that I shall pass my days in peace.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah woe is me! now verily may I mourn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy fate, Orestes, when thou farest thus,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mocked by thy mother in death! Is it not well?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not well with thee, but it is well with him.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hear her, Avenging Spirit of the dead</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose ashes still are warm!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The Avenger heard</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When it behoved her, and hath ruled it well.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Mock on; this is thine hour of victory.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That hour Orestes shall not end, nor thou.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>End it! ’Tis we are ended and undone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thy coming, Sir, would merit large reward,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If thou indeed hast stopped her wagging tongue.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then I may take my leave, if all is well.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not so; such entertainment would reflect</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On me and on thy master, my ally.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Be pleased to enter; leave this girl without</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To wail her friends’ misfortunes and her own. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Seemed she to you a mother woe-begone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Weeping and wailing for a son thus slain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This miserable woman? No, she left us</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With mocking laughter. Dearest brother mine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy death was my death warrant. Woe is me!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With thee has gone my last fond hope, that thou</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wast living yet and wouldst return some day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To avenge my sire and me, unhappy me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now whither shall I turn, alone, bereft</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of thee and of my sire? Henceforth again</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Must I be slave to those I most abhor,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My father’s murderers. Is it not well with me?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No, never will I cross their threshold more,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But at these gates will lay me down to die,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There pine away. If any in the house</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Think me an eyesore, let him slay me; life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To me were misery and death a boon.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Strophe 1</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Where, O Zeus, are thy bolts, O Sun-god, where is thy ray,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If with thy lightning, thy light, these things be not shown to the day?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Ah me! Ah me!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Peuchter, why weepest thou?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Woe!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Hush! No rash cry!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Thou’lt be my death.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>What meanest thou?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>If ye would whisper hope</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That they we know for dead may be alive;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye trample on a bleeding heart.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Nay, I bethink me how</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Argive seer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> was swallowed up,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Snared by a woman for a golden chain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now in the nether world⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Ah me!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>A living soul he reigns.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Ah woe!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Aye woe! for the murderess⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Was slain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Aye, slain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>I know, I know. A champion was raised up</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To avenge the mourning ghost.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No champion for me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The one yet left is taken, reft away.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Strophe 2</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>A weary, weary lot is thine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>I know it well, too well,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When life, month in month out,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like a dark torrent flows,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Horror on horror, pain on pain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>We have watched its tearful course.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Cease then to turn it where⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>What wouldst thou say?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>No comfort’s left of hope</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From him of royal blood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sprung from one stock with me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Death is the common lot.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>To die as he died, hapless youth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Entangled in the reins</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beneath the tramp of coursers’ hoofs!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Torture ineffable!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, in a strange land far away⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Alas!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>To lie untended by my hands,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unwept, ungraced with sepulture by me!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Joy, dearest sister, sped me hitherward,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And haply with unseemly haste I ran</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bring the joyful tidings and relief</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From all thy woes and weary sufferings.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And where canst <em>thou</em> have found a remedy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For irremediable woes like mine?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Orestes⁠—hear it from my lips⁠—is here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In bodily presence, as thou see’st me now.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Art mad, poor sister, making mockery</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of thine own misery and mine withal?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I mock not, by our father’s hearth I swear it;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In very truth we have him here again.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O misery! And, prithee, from whose mouth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hadst thou this tale so blindly credited?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I trusted to none other than myself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The clearest proof and evidence of my eyes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What proof, what evidence! What sight, poor girl,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lit this illusion in thy fevered brain?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O, as thou lov’st me, listen, then decide,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My story told, if I am mad or sane.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, if it pleases thee to speak, speak on,</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I will, and tell thee all that I have seen.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As I approached our sire’s ancestral tomb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I noted that the barrow still was wet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With streams of milk, and round the monument</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Garlands were wreathed of every flower that blows.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I marvelled much and peered around in dread</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of someone watching me; but when I found</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That nothing stirred, nearer the tomb I crept;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And there upon the grave’s edge lay a lock</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of hair fresh-severed; at the sight there flashed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A dear familiar image on my soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Orestes; ’twas a token and a sign</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From him whom most of all the world I love.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I took it in my hands and not a sound</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I uttered but my eyes o’erbrimmed for joy.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I knew, I knew it then as now, for sure:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This shining treasure could be none but his.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who else could set it there save thee or me?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And ’twas not I assuredly, nor thou;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How couldst thou, when thou mayst not leave the house</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not e’en to sacrifice? Our mother then?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When did our mother’s heart that way incline?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could she have ’scaped our notice, had she done it?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No, from Orestes comes this offering.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Courage, dear sister. Never destiny</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ran one unbroken course. On us till now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She frowned; to-day gives promise of her smiles.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Alas! I pity thy simplicity,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fond sister.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Are not then my tidings glad?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou knowst not in what land of dreams thou art.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Wouldst have me doubt the evidence of my eyes?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He is dead, I tell thee; look not to the dead</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For a deliverer; <em>that</em> hope has gone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah woe is me! Who told thee of his death?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>One who was present when he met his fate.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Where is the man? ’Tis strange, ’tis passing strange.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Within; our mother’s not unwelcome guest.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah me! Ah me! And whose then can have been</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Those wreaths, that mill outpoured upon the grave?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To me it seems most like that they were brought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A kindly offering to Orestes dead.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And I, poor fool, was hurrying in hot haste</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To bring my joyful message, unaware</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of our ill plight; and now that I have brought it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I find fresh sorrows added to the old.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So stands the case; but be advised by me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lighten this the burden of our woes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Wouldst have me raise the dead to life again?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I meant not that; I am not so demented.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What wouldst thou then that lies within my powers?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Be bold to execute what I enjoin.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If it can profit, I will not refuse.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Success, remember, is the meed of toil.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know it, and will help thee all I can.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then listen how I am resolved to act.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From friends, thou knowest now as well as I,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We cannot look for succour; death hath snatched</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All from us and we two are left alone.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While yet my brother lived and tidings came</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of his prosperity, I still had hopes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That he would yet appear to avenge his sire;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But now that he is dead, to thee I turn;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From thee a sister craves a sister’s aid,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To slay⁠—shrink not⁠—our father’s murderer,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Aegisthus. There, I plainly tell thee all.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why hesitate? What faintest ray of hope</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is left to excuse thy lethargy, whose lot</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Henceforth must be to mourn the ancestral wealth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whereof thou art defrauded, to lament</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A youth that withers fast, unloved, unwed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For dream not wedded bliss can e’er be thine;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Too wary is Aegisthus to permit</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That children should be born of thee or me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For his destruction. But, if thou attend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My counsel, thou shalt reap large benefits:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>First, from our dead sire, and our brother too,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A name for piety; and furthermore,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A free-born woman thou shalt stand revealed;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And worthy spousals shall be thine, for worth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In women ever captivates all men.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seest thou not too the honour thou shalt win</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Both for thyself and me, if thou consent?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What countryman, what stranger will not greet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our presence, when he sees us, with acclaim?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Look, friends, upon this sister pair,” he’ll cry,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Who raised their father’s house, who dared confront</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their foes in power, who jeopardised their lives</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In bloody vengeance. Honour to the pair,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Honour and worship! Yea at every feast</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let all the people laud their bravery.”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So will our fame be bruited far and wide,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor shall our glory fail in life or death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sweet sister, hear me, take thy father’s part,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Side with thy brother, give me, give thyself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Surcease of sorrow; and remember this,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A life of shame is shame for noble souls.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Forethought for those that speak and those that hear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In such grave issues, is most serviceable.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Before she spake, were not her mind perverse,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She had remembered caution, but she, friends,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Remembers not. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</b>.</i> What glamour fooled thee thus</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To take up arms thus boldly and enlist me?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou art a woman, see’st thou not? no man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No match in battle for thine adversaries;</span>
								<br/>
								<span><em>Their</em> fortune rises with the flowing tide,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ours ebbs and leaves us soon a stranded hulk;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who then could hope to grapple with a foe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So mighty and escape without a fall?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bethink thee, if thy speech were overheard,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We are like to change our evil plight for worse.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Small comfort or commodity to win</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Glory and die an ignominious death!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mere death were easy, but to crave for death</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And be denied that last boon⁠—there’s the sting.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nay, I entreat, before we wreck ourselves</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And perish root and branch, restrain thy rage.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All thou hast said for me shall be unsaid,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An empty breath. O learn at length, though late,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To yield, nor match thy weakness with their strength.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hearken! for mortal man there is no gift</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Greater than forethought and sobriety.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis as I thought: before thy answer came</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I knew full well thou wouldst refuse thine aid.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unaided then and by myself I’ll do it,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For done it must be, though I work alone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah well-a-way!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would thou hadst been so minded on that day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our father died! What couldst thou not have wrought!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My temper was the same, my mind less ripe.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Study to keep the same mind all thy days.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This counsel means refusal of thine aid.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes, for misfortune dogs such enterprise.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I praise thy prudence, hate thy cowardice.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>E’en when thou shalt commend me, I will bear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy commendation no less patiently.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That trial thou wilt ne’er endure from me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who lives will see; time yet may prove thee wrong.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Begone! in thee there is no power to aid.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not so; in thee there is no will to learn.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Go to thy mother; tell it all to her.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My hatred of thee does not reach so far.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou wouldst dishonour me; that much is sure.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Dishonour? No, I seek to save thine honour.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Am I to make thy rule of honour mine?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>When thou art wise, then thou shalt guide us both.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Sound words; ’tis sad they are so misapplied.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou hittest well the blot that is thine own.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How? dost deny the plea I urge is just?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No; but e’en justice sometimes worketh harm.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I choose not to conform to such a rule.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, if thy purpose hold, thou’lt own me right.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It holds; I shall not swerve in awe of thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Is this thy last word? Wilt not be advised?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No, naught is loathlier than ill advice.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou seemest deaf to all that I can urge.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My resolution was not born to-day.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then I will go, for thou canst not be brought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To approve my words, nor I to approve thy ways.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Go in then; I shall never follow thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>E’en shouldst thou pray me: ’tis insane to urge</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An idle suit.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, if thou art wise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In thine own eyes, so let it be; anon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sore stricken, thou wilt take my words to heart. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chrysothemis</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Wise nature taught the birds of air</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For those who reared them in the nest to care;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The parent bird is nourished by his brood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shall not we, as they,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The debt of nature pay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall man not show like gratitude?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By Zeus who hurls the leven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By Themis throned in heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There comes a judgment day;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not long shall punishment delay.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O voice that echoes to the world below,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bear to the dead a wail of woe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A coronach, a tale of shame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Atreus’ line proclaim.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Tell him his house is stricken sore,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell him his children now no more</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">In amity together dwell;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dire strife the twain divides,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alone Electra bides,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Alone she braves the surging swell.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Disconsolate doth she her sire bewail,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like the forlornest nightingale;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Reckless of life, could she but quell</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cursed pair, those Furies fell.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where shall ye find on earth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A maid to match her worth?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>No generous soul were fain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By a base life his fair repute to stain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such baseness thou didst scorn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Choosing, my child, to mourn with them that mourn.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wise and of daughters best⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With double honours thou art doubly blest.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>O may I see thee tower</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As high above thy foes in wealth and power</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As now they tower o’er thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For now thy state is piteous to see.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet brightly dost thou shine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For fear of Zeus far-famed and love of laws divine.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Pray tell me, ladies, were we guided right,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And are we close upon our journey’s end?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What seek’st thou, stranger, and with what intent?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I seek and long have sought Aegisthus’ home.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis here; thy guide is nowise blameable.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Would one of you announce to those within</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The auspicious advent of our company?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This maiden, as the next of kin, will do it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Go, madam, say that visitors have come</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And seek Aegisthus⁠—certain Phocians.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah woe is me! You come not to confirm</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By ocular proof the rumours that we heard?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I’ve heard no “rumours.” Agèd Strophius</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Charged me with tidings of Orestes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ha!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What tidings, stranger? how I quake with dread!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ashes within this narrow urn we bear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All that remains of him, as thou mayst see.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah me unhappy! in my very sight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lies palpable the burden of my woes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If for Orestes thou art weeping, know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This brazen urn contains the dust of him.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O if it hold his ashes, let me, friend,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O let me, let me take it in my hands.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not for this dust alone, but for myself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all my house withal, I’ll weep and wail.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Bring it and give it her, whoe’er she be;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For not as an ill-wisher, but as friend,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or haply near of kin, she asks the boon.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Last relics of the man I most did love,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Orestes! high in hope I sent thee forth;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How hast thou dashed all hope in thy return!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Radiant as day thou speddest forth, and now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I hold a dusty nothing in my hands.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would I had died before I rescued thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From death and sent thee to a foreign land!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then hadst thou fallen together with thy sire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And lain beside him in the ancestral tomb:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now in a strange land, exiled, far from home,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Far from thy sister thou hast died, ah me!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How miserably! I was not by to lave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And deck with loving hands thy corse, and snatch</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy charrèd bones from out the flaming pyre.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alas! by foreign hands these rites were paid,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now thou comest back to me, of dust</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A little burden in this little urn.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O for the nursing and the toil, no toil,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I spent on thee an infant, all in vain!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For thou wast ne’er thy mother’s babe, but mine;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou hadst no nurse in all the house but me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I was <em>thy sister</em>, none so called but me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But now all this hath vanished in a day,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dead with thy death, a whirlwind that passed by,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And left all desolate; thy father’s gone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I am dead in thee, and thou art lost;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And our foes laugh. That mother, mother none,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whose crimes, as oft thou gav’st me secret word,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou wouldst thyself full speedily avenge,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is mad for joy. But now malignant fate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy fate and mine, hath blasted all and sent me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Instead of that dear form I loved so well,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cold ashes and an unavailing shade.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">Ah me! Ah me!</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">O piteous corse!</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">Ah woe is me!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O woeful coming! I am all undone,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Undone by thee, beloved brother mine!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Take me, O take me to thy last lone home,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A shadow to a shade, that I may dwell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With thee for ever in the underworld;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For here on earth we shared alike, and now</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I fain would die to share with thee thy tomb;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For with the dead there is no mourning, none.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Child of a mortal sire, Electra, think,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Orestes too was mortal; calm thy grief.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Death is a debt that all of us must pay.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah me! what shall I say where all words fail?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet I can no longer curb my tongue.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What sudden trouble made thee speak like this?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Is this the famed Electra I behold?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis she, and very wretched is her state.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O for the heavy change! Alas, alas!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Surely thy pity, sir, is not for <em>me</em>.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O beauty marred by foul and impious spite!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, sir, this wreck of womanhood am I.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Alas, how sad a life of singleness!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why gaze thus on me, stranger, and lament?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Of my own ills how little then I knew!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Was this revealed by any word of mine?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>By seeing thee conspicuous in thy woes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And yet my looks reveal but half my woes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Could there be woes more piteous to behold?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, to be housemate with the murderers⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Whose murderers? at what villainy dost hint?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My father’s; and their slave am I perforce.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who is it puts upon thee this constraint?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My mother, not a mother save in name.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>By blows or petty tyrannies or how?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>By blows and tyrannies of every kind.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And is there none to help or stay her hand?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>None; there <em>was</em> one, the man whose dust I hold.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Poor maid! my pity’s stirred at sight of thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou art the first who ever pitied me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am the first to feel a common woe.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What, canst thou be some kinsman from afar?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If these are friends who hear us, I would answer.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yes, they are friends; thou needst not fear to speak.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Give back this urn, and then I’ll tell thee all.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ask not so hard a thing, good sir, I pray.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Do as I bid thee; thou shalt not repent it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O, I adjure thee, rob me not of that</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The most I prize on earth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It may not be.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah! woe for thee, Orestes, woe is me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If I am not to give thee burial.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Guard well thy lips; thou hast no right to mourn.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No right to mourn a brother who is dead!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To speak of him in this wise is not meet.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What, am I so dishonoured of the dead?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Of none dishonoured: this is not thy part.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not if Orestes’ ashes here I hold?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>They are not his, though feigned to pass for his.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Where then is my unhappy brother’s grave?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>There is no grave; we bury not the quick.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What sayst thou, boy?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nothing that is not true.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He lives?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>As surely as I am alive.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What, art thou he?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Look at this signet ring,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My father’s; let it witness if I lie.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O happy day!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O, happy, happy day!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thy voice I greet!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My voice gives greeting back.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My arms embrace thee!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>May they clasp me aye!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My countrywomen, dearest friends, behold</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Orestes who in feigning died, and so</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By feigning is alive again and safe.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>We see him, daughter, and this glad surprise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Makes our eyes overflow with happy tears.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Strophe</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Son of my best loved sire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now hast thou come, art here to find, to see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy heart’s desire.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>E’en so; but best keep silence for a while.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>What need for silence?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>’Twere wise, lest someone from the house should hear.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, by Queen Artemis the virgin maid,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of womenfolk I ne’er will be afraid,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Those stay-at-homes, mere cumberers of the ground,</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Yet note that in the breasts of women dwells</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The War-God too, as thou methinks hast found.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Ah me, ah me!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou wak’st a memory</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Inveterate, ineflaceable,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>An ache time cannot quell.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>I know it too; but when the hour shall strike</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then it behoves us to recall those deeds.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Antistrophe</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>All time, each passing hour</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Henceforward I were fain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To tell my griefs, my pain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For late and hardly have I won free speech.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis so; then forfeit not this liberty.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>How forfeit it?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>By speaking out of season overmuch,</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>But who would barter speech for silence now,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who could be dumb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now that beyond all thought and hope</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’ve seen thee come?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>That sight was then vouchsafed thee when the gods</span>
								<br/>
								<span>First monished me to turn my steps towards home.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>If a god guided thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To seek our halls, this boon</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Surpasses all before, I see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The hand of heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>To check thy gladness I am loth, and yet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This ecstasy of joy⁠—it makes me fear.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>O after many a weary year</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Restored to glad my eyes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seeing my utter misery, forbear⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>What is thy prayer?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Forbear to rob me of the light,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The presence of thy face.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>If any dared essay it, I were wrath.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Dost thou consent?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>How could I otherwise?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</b>.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span class="i5">Friends, a voice is in my ear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">That I never hoped to hear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">At the glad sound how could I</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">Be mute nor raise a joyous cry?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">But I have thee, and the light</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">Of thy countenance so bright</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">Not e’en sorrow can eclipse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">Or still the music of those lips.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Spare me all superfluity of words⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How vile our mother, how Aegisthus drains</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By waste and luxury our father’s house;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The time admits not such prolixity.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But tell me rather what will best subserve</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our present need⁠—where we must show ourselves,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or lie in wait, and either way confound</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mockery and triumph of our foes.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And see that when we twain are gone within</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our mother read not in thy radiant looks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our secret; weep as overwhelmed with grief</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At our feigned story; when the victory’s won</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We shall have time and liberty to laugh.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, as it pleaseth thee it pleases me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Brother, for all my pleasure is thy gift,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not mine; nor would I purchase for myself</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The greatest boon that cost thee the least pang:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So should I cross the providence that guides us.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How it stands with us, doubtless thou hast heard.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Aegisthus, as thou knowest, is away;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Only our mother keeps the house, and fear not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That she will see my face lit up with smiles;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My hatred of her is too deep engrained.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Moreover, since thy coming I have wept,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>-Wept for pure joy and still must weep to see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The dead alive, on one day dead and living.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>lt works me strangely; if my sire appeared</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In bodily presence, I should now believe it</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No mocking phantom but his living self.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus far no common fate hath guided thee;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So lead me as thou wilt, for left alone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I had myself achieved of two things one,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A noble living or a noble death.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hush, hush! I hear a stir within the house</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As if one issued forth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> and Pylades.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pass in, good sirs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye are sure of welcome; they within will not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Reject your gift, though bitter it may prove.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Fools! madmen! are ye weary of your lives,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or are your natural wits too dull to see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That ye are standing, not upon the brink,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But in the midst of mortal jeopardy?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nay, had I not kept watch this weary while,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Here at the door, your plot had slipped inside</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ere ye yourselves had entered. As it is,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My watchfulness has fended this mishap.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now that your wordy eloquence has an end,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And your insatiate cries of joy, go in.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis ill delaying in such case, and well</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To make an end.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How shall I fare within?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Right well; to start with, thou art known to none.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou hast reported, I presume, my death.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>They’ll speak of thee as though thou wert a shade.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And are they glad thereat, or what say they?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I’ll tell thee when the time is ripe: meanwhile</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whate’er they do, however ill, is well.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I pray thee, brother, tell me who is this?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Dost thou not see?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know not, nor can guess.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not know the man to whom thou gav’st me once?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What man? how mean’st thou?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>He that stole me hence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through thy forethought, and safe to Phocis bore.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Can this be he who, when our sire was slain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Faithful among the many false I found?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis he; let that suffice thee; ask no more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O happy day! O sole deliverer</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Agamemnon’s house, how cam’st thou hither?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Art thou indeed our saviour who redeemed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From endless woes my brother and myself?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O hands beloved, O messenger whose feet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were bringers of glad tidings, how so long</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Couldst thou be with me and remain unknown,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stay me with feigned fables and conceal</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The truth that gave me life? Hail, father, hail!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For ’tis a father whom I seem to see.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Verily no man in the self-same day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was hated so and so much loved as thou.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aged Servant</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Enough methinks; the tale ’twixt then and now⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Many revolving nights and days as many</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall serve, Electra, to unfold it all.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> and Pylades.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why stand ye here! ’tis time for you to act,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now Clytemnestra is alone; no man</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is now within; but, if ye stay your hand,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not only with her house-carls will ye fight</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But with a troop more numerous and more skilled.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Our business, Pylades, would seem to crave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No longer parley; let us instantly</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Enter, but ere we enter first adore</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The gods who keep the threshold of the house. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> and Pylades enter the palace.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O King Apollo! lend a gracious ear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To them and me, to me too who so oft</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Laid on thy shrine with humble hands my best.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now with vows (I cannot offer more),</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Apollo, Lord Lycean, I beseech,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Implore, adjure thee, prosper this our work,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Defend the right and show to godless men</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How the gods vindicate impiety.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Breathing out blood and vengeance, lo!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stalks Ares, sure though slow.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>F’en now the hounds are on the trail;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within, the sinners at their coming quail.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A little while and death shall realise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The vision that now floats before mine eyes.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>For now within the house is led</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By stealth the champion of the dead;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He treads once more the ancestral hall of kings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And death new-whetted in his hands he brings.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Great Maia’s son conducts him on his way</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shrouds his guile and brooks not more delay.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Strophe</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>O dearest women, even as I speak</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The men are at their work; but not a word.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What work? what are they at?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>E’en now she decks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The urn for burial and the pair stand by.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why spedst thou forth?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To keep a watch for fear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Aegisthus should forestall us unawares.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Within.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Woe! woe! O woeful house,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of friends forsaken, full of murderers!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Listen! acry within⁠—hear ye not, friends?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I heard and shuddered⁠—oh, an awesome cry.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah woe is me! Aegisthus, where art thou?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hark; once again a wail.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O son, my son,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Have pity on thy mother!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou hadst none</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On him or on the father that begat him.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Unhappy realm and house,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The curse that dogged thee day by day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is dying, dying fast.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I am stricken, ah!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Strike, if thou canst, again.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clytemnestra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Woe, woe is me once more!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I would that woe</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were for Aegisthus not for thee alone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>The curses work; the buried live again,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And blood for blood, the slayer’s blood they drain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ghosts of victims long since slain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> and Pylades from the palace.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Antistrophe</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Lo they come forth with gory hands that reek</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of sacrifice to Ares⁠—’twas done well.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How have ye sped, Orestes?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>All within</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is well, if Phoebus’ oracle spake well.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The wretched woman’s dead?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No longer fear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy mother’s arrogance will flout thee more.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Cease, for I see Aegisthus full in sight.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Back, youths, back to the house!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Where see ye him?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Approaching from the suburb with an air</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of exultation. He is ours!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Quick to the palace doorway! half your work</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is well done; do no less well what remains.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Fear not, we shall.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then speed thee on thy way.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>See, I am gone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Leave what is here to me. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> and Pylades; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</b> approaches.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Twere not amiss to breathe some soft words in his ear,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That he may blindly rush into the lists of doom.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Could any of you tell me where to find</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Phocian strangers who, I hear, have brought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>News of Orestes midst the chariots wrecked?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thee, thee I question, thee, in former days</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So froward: it concerns thee most, methinks,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thou, as best informed, canst tell me best.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know for sure, else were I unconcerned</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In what has happened to my nearest kin.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Where then are these newcomers? Tell me straight.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Within; they’ve won their kindly hostess’ heart.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Did they in very truth report his death?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>They did; and more, they showed us the dead man.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>May I too view the body to make sure?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou mayst, but ’tis a gruesome spectacle.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou givest me much joy against thy wont.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I wish thee joy, if here is food for joy.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Silence! attend! throw open wide the gate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For all Mycenae, Argos all, to see.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If any heretofore was puffed with hopes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of this pretender, now he sees him dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let him in time accept my yoke, nor wait</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wisdom by chastisement to learn too late.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My lesson’s learnt already; time hath taught me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wisdom of consenting with the strong.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The scene opens showing a shrouded corpse with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</b> and Pylades beside it.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O Zeus, I look upon this form laid low</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By jealousy of Heaven, but if my words</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Seem to thee overbold, be they unsaid.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Take from the face the face-cloth; I, as kin,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I too would pay my tribute of lament.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lift it thyself; ’tis not for me but thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To see and kindly greet what lieth here.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well said, so will I. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</b>.</i> If she be within</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go call me Clytemnestra, I would see her⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>She is beside thee; look not otherwhere.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</b> lifts the face-cloth.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O horror!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why dost start? is the face strange?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who spread the net wherein, O woe is me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I lie enmeshed?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hast thou not learnt ere this</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The dead of whom thou spakest are alive?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Alas! I read thy riddle; ’tis none else</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than thou, Orestes, whom I now address.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A seer so wise, and yet befooled so long!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O I am spoiled, undone! yet suffer me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One little word.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Electra</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Brother, in heaven’s name</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let him not speak a word or plead his cause.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When a poor wretch is in the toils of fate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What can a brief reprieve avail him? No,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Slay him outright and having slain him give</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His corse to such grave-makers as is meet,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Far from our sight; for me no otherwise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can he wipe out the memory of past wrongs.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</b>.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Quick, get thee in; the issue lies not now</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In words; the case is tried and thou must die.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why hale me indoors? if my doom be just,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What need of darkness? Why not slay me here?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>“Tis not for thee to order; go within;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where thou didst slay my father thou must die.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah! is there need this palace should behold</span>
								<br/>
								<span>All woes of Pelops’ line, now and to come?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thine own they shall; thus much I can predict.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thy skill as seer derives not from thy sire.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou bandiest words; our going is delayed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lead the way.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No, thou must go the first.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegisthus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lest I escape?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Orestes</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nay, not to let thee choose</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The manner of thy death; thou must be spared</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No bitterness of death, and well it were</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If on transgressors swift this sentence fall,</span>
								<br/>
								<span><em>Slay him</em>; so wickedness should less abound.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>House of Atreus! thou hast passed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Through the fire and won at last</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Freedom, perfected to-day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By this glorious essay.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
